Welcome to TypeScript Fundamentals V3.
My name is Mike North, and
I'm a senior staff engineer at LinkedIn.
I work in a part of the company
called the developer productivity and
happiness team, where I'm
an infrastructure user experience expert.
As well as the company's lead for
TypeScript infrastructure and
how we roll TypeScript out across
all of our JavaScript code bases.
So we're gonna start with some real talk,
I can't make you a TypeScript
expert at the end of a one day workshop,
it's just not possible.
But what I can do is make sure that by
the end of today, you have a well formed
mental model that will hold up
even when things get complicated.
And then you can learn more and
you can try these things out that
we're going to introduce today.
And I can guarantee you that by
setting you on the right path,
you will find it easier and easier to
take in that new information on your own
as you continue your TypeScript adventure.
So first,
let's talk about what TypeScript is.
It's a syntactic superset of JavaScript,
meaning it sort of starts
with all of the JavaScript syntax
you know as its starting point and
then layers additional concepts on top.
It's an open source project
maintained by Microsoft,
and the goal is to add
types to JavaScript.
So through the use of the compiler,
TypeScript compiles out to
readable JavaScript, and
it comes in three parts.
There's the programming language,
the language server,
and that's a piece of software that's
sort of behind your editing environment.
It feeds your editor like VSCode,
all that great information
that powers autocompletes.
And then there's the compiler, and the
compiler is what performs that analysis on
your code base and makes sure
everything lines up the way it should.
TypeScript is incredibly popular.
So this is the third version of the
TypeScript Fundamentals course that I'm
teaching for Frontend Masters.
And 2019, this is where I
taught the first version, and
I brought out a chart like this.
And I was really proud to be able to show,
look, React's a very popular library and
TypeScript is on par with React,
look, it's so popular.
That trend has obviously changed,
React looks sort of like it's
been left in the dust here.
I mean, these are two completely
different projects but
just in terms of the things we think
about with ubiquitous pieces of tooling,
things that are sort of always in your
Node modules for one reason or another.
TypeScript is one of those
things that is increasingly
part of what you're already doing,
even if you're not using it directly.
And to me, it's starting to
look like exponential growth,
not even linear growth here.
So, everybody is using this,
people are really excited about it, why?
I'm gonna give you a couple reasons
why you might care about TypeScript,
why it might be an appealing thing for
you to look into.
And we're obviously gonna learn
more about this throughout the day,
you'll have many reasons
by the end of the day.
First, it allows you as a code author to
leave more of your intent on the page.
So if we look at a function like this that
you could find in a regular JavaScript
application, this, it sort of is
a function that just runs a + b, right?
This could be string concatenation,
it could be numeric addition,
I mean the function name in this case
gives us sort of a clue here, but
if you use this to combine strings,
it would work.
Imagine in the future if
somebody came along and
made what they thought was a non-breaking
change and they add the ability for
a third upper end to be part
of what's happening here.
If you were using this with string
concatenation, you'd end up with zeros at
the end of every string that you're
combining through this function.
So intent matters here, and whenever
there are multiple interpretations
of what are the constraints,
and what's going on, and
what was this designed to do,
you're kinda asking for trouble.
In the TypeScript world,
we can have something like this where we
say a is a number, b is a number,
this function returns a number.
And even though theoretically a + b
could be used to combine strings,
it's very clear what the author
intended for this to do.
And not only is the code more clear
as we read it, but we are alerted
to any use of add that deviates from
what the author originally intended.
And this little pop up here,
this error message,
is the kind of thing you would see right
in your editing environment like VSCode.
So baking in more of that intent
is a huge win for TypeScript.
Reason number two of many,
TypeScript has the potential to allow you
to move some kinds of errors from runtime
where they affect users to compile time,
which is maybe before you
even open a pull request.
Examples of these kinds of errors that you
can catch include values that might or
might not be there.
Incomplete refactoring where maybe
you should have changed something in
seven places but you only caught six.
And then internal contracts
within your code base.
Maybe it's the properties you thought you
were passing to a component, right, and
now it requires that you
give it something new,
TypeScript will help you
catch that kind of thing.
Finally, TypeScript serves
as the foundation for
a great code authoring experience.
And I am of course referring to not
just the validation of making sure
we're passing functions the right things,
but this great auto-complete where
we sort of get code documentation brought
right into our editing environment.
Really, really cool stuff and
in my opinion this is sort of catching
up with the rest of the software
engineering world where we finally get
a rich editing environment instead of
basically a lightweight text editor
that does syntax highlighting.
That's kind of where the JavaScript
world has been for too long.
So, the last time I taught this workshop,
this is TypeScript Fundamentals V2,
we spent a lot of time uncommenting code,
looking at small examples.
Inspecting tooltips to
understand what's going on,
how is TypeScript understanding our code,
we have leveled things up for this course.
So the only things you're going to need
in order to follow along are this website
that we're looking at right now and
the official TypeScript website.
You won't even need to crack
open your code editor, why?
We've brought VSCode into the browser, so
we're gonna be able to see examples and
get hands-on without having to set
anything up, some really cool stuff.
Let's look at how we're going to
spend our time during this course.
First, we will look at compiling
our first TypeScript program and
we will talk about variables,
objects, and arrays.
We'll take a quick break, and
then we're going to get into some theory.
And we'll talk about how TypeScript's type
system is different from what you may
have seen in Java, or C#, basically
anywhere else in the programming world.
TypeScript is sort of
a unique beast in some ways.
After lunch, we're going to
collaboratively work together to define
some of our own type information.
And after tackling some of the last
core concepts in the JavaScript world,
functions and classes, we'll talk about
these top and bottom types, right?
These are things that can hold anything or
nothing.
Sounds abstract but
they're very, very useful.
Finally, towards the end of the day,
we're gonna slow things way down and
tackle one of the most mysterious and
abstract aspects of the TypeScript
programming language.
And that is generics, or
defining types in terms of other types.
This is one of the great conceptual
walls I can help you get over,
and generally one of the biggest
sticking points that people hit as
they're trying to start working
with this programming language.
Here's a question, in a design system
how can I support consuming apps
that don't use TypeScript as
well as those that do, and
do I need to provide type
definitions as well as prototypes?
Well, this is one of the great
aspects of TypeScript, one of the core
principles is that it needs to be able
to work with regular JavaScript code.
So even if your consumers
are using regular JavaScript,
they'll still get a lot of
the benefits of that type information
that comes from a library
written in TypeScript, right?
So if you write the TypeScript, all of
your users will get that better developer
experience to varying degrees but they're
all going to benefit to some degree.
A very, very good question.
We'll learn more about that very quickly,
actually, in the next
chapter of the course.
So Nita asks are there any
open source projects for
beginners where we can apply and
practice TypeScript after this course?
I'm gonna have to look back on that one,
I'm sure there are some,
one I can tell you for
sure is the TypeScript website.
So there are a lot of issues on the
TypeScript website that are marked as good
for new contributors, and by its very
nature, it has a lot of small examples.
And as people who are just
learning the language,
that's kind of a superpower in that case
where you can use your lack of experience
in this specific area to speak to
what's confusing and what's not.
And you can really help
make the documentation,
the little small projects that are part of
that TypeScript handbook and the website.
You can make those a little bit better so
that they work for
you because you're the intended audience,
right?
So we have another question, are there
any plans to introduce aspects of
TypeScript into the JavaScript
programming language?
I would have to say, no, but don't worry.
So JavaScript is kind of strange in
that code that we wrote in 1995,
1992, it still has to run as JavaScript,
right?
The Internet has to remain
backwards compatible.
And for that reason,
it's unlikely that we'll shift from sort
of a dynamically typed or duck typed
model to a statically typed model.
So don't expect anytime soon for
types to become
part of what most people
can run in their browser.
Now, however,
[LAUGH] we do see examples where
something is sort of piloted
in TypeScript, right?
TypeScript adds a feature by itself and
then those become part of the JavaScript
programming language but
it doesn't include the types.
Examples of this include decorators, which
are likely to be part of JavaScript soon.
Private fields, so
TypeScript has this concept of
class fields that only
that class itself can see.
Well, that's now part of JavaScript.
So there are a few situations where,
aside from the typing aspect of things,
language features sort of prove
themselves out in the TypeScript world.
And then that allows TC39, the standards
body that decides what is part of
JavaScript, right,
it allows them to see hey,
there are a lot of apps that
got a lot of value out of this.
How can we bring this to everybody, people
who write JavaScript and TypeScript?
And then sort of we merge everything
together, right, where we make sure that
once it's standardized, everyone can
make use of those kinds of features.
Well, let's jump in and
look at how we might compile
our first TypeScript program.
Now, if you wanted to,
you could check out this repo,
if you click Edit on GitHub,
it'll take you to a page in this repo.
I would encourage you not to for
this video course because we're
gonna move kinda quickly, and
I'm gonna show you everything you would
see if you were to compile it yourself.